[HEARTBEAT]
[EXPLOSION]
>> Aren't we all seekers?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Aren't we all in
search of something?
search of meaning?
Join us as we take a
look into our past--
into the world of the ancients.
We will journey with two
explorers, George S. Alexander
and Natalis Rosen, as they join
the lines between fact and myth
to make an
astonishing discovery.
A great civilization, a
noble and powerful people.
Warriors, wealth,
royalty, luxury--
a lost, legendary land.
Is there any evidence that
the ancient city of Atlantis
could have existed?
Could there be any truth
behind the mystery,
and how could we find out?
History, as always, is
a good place to start.
I came across writings from the
Greek philosopher Plato, who
lived about 2,400 years ago.
His descriptions of the
12,000 year-old Atlantis
were very detailed,
and gave clues
to everything from
the size of Atlantis
to its location to the culture
of the people who would have
inhabited Atlantis at the time.
Atlantis, to many, is
no more than a legend--
a myth.
But as my research into
Plato's work grew and deepened,
Atlantis started to
become more and more real.
>> But how did Plato obtain
his information about the lost
city?
>> His writings reveal
that Plato received all his
information from one of
his ancestors called Solon,
who lived 200
years before Plato.
Solon was a great
Greek statesman,
and he was said to have
invented democracy.
Solon had traveled to
Egypt, to the city of Sais,
to find out more about
the ancient history
of our civilization.
In those days, Egypt had the
longest-documented historical
records available.
Solon, as a statesman,
had a vested interest
to find out about the origin of
human civilization and culture.
There, an old Egyptian
priest told him
about the lost city of Atlantis
and its mighty ancient empire,
catastrophes and war.
He showed him the
ancient hieroglyphs
in the Egyptian temple which
detailed the story of Atlantis.
According to the
inscriptions, Egypt was once
a colony of Atlantis, and
that's how the ancient Egyptians
had received this information.
Unfortunately, the temple of
Sais doesn't exist anymore.
It was built in the Nile
Delta in a swamp area,
and has literally
sunk into the soil.
However, via Solon and
Plato, the information
from the ancient
temple was preserved.
Solon's detailed notes about the
existence of this great empire
were published six
generations later,
by his descendant Plato--
the great philosopher.
This is how the great
legend survived.
>> So exactly what details
did Plato save for future
generations?
>> If we consider
Africa 12,000 years ago,
with some of its land laying
150 meters below sea level,
then the coastline may have
looked very similar to this.
And according to
Plato, these countries
were colonies of
Atlantis at the time.
Plato tells us that
the empire of Atlantis
consisted of 10
kingdoms and was made up
of a number of islands,
coastlines, and peninsulas
in the Atlantic Ocean.
It was positioned
outside Gibraltar,
bordering on southern Spain--
once called Gades.
Today's city of Cadiz reminds
us of the ancient name.
The main island was
also called Atlantis,
and it was about 700
kilometers across.
It had mountains
around the coast
and a great, central plain.
Its most prominent feature
was the capital city--
the capital city of Atlantis.
Plato gave a measurement
of 127 stadia
to the overall
width of the city.
If we take the ancient
Greek conversion
of 185 meters per
stadia, it would
make the capital
city of Atlantis
about 23 and 1/2
kilometers across--
a huge city.
Its layout was highly
unusual, a city consisting
of circles of land and water.
Here are Plato's exact words.
>> "There were alternate
zones of sea and land,
larger and smaller,
encircling one another.
There were two of land
and three of water."
>> Here we have two land
rings and three water rings,
as Plato explained.
The center of the city,
unlike today's cities,
was sparsely populated, and
was the holy and sacred center
of the empire of Atlantis.
It housed the king, royal
family, and their palaces,
servants, and the
magnificent Temple
of Poseidon, which was the
main god of the Atlanteans.
It also included the
fabled Garden of Poseidon,
with exotic trees and
fruits, cold and hot springs,
fountains, and pools.
This area was reserved for the
royal elite and high priests
only.
It was protected by mighty
walls and a ring of water.
The first land ring
can be described
as the religious
sector of the city.
It was said to have been home
to a large priesthood who
performed numerous rituals and
sacrifices at various shrines.
It had towers, gates,
and hanging gardens.
Atlantis had a powerful navy.
And the second water
ring, according to Plato,
was the military harbor that
docked at least 1,200 warships.
The second land ring
housed the military,
and would have had living
quarters for up to 240,000
sailors to man the ships.
This ring also housed the
naval stores and supplies.
It had underground docks,
soldiers training facilities,
towers, and guard houses.
It had a road, or a racetrack,
in the middle of it,
which was 200 meters
wide and ran right
around the second land ring.
This land ring was the
military center of the empire.
The third water ring was the
harbor for merchant ships,
and also functioned as a
public transport system,
with small boats
ferrying people from one
part of the city to the other.
Plato then describes
the outer wall,
which encircles what one would
today call downtown Atlantis.
>> "The area between the outer
wall and the merchant harbor
was densely crowded and
busy all day and all night."
>> This indicates
an enormous area.
And if it was densely
populated, then it
suggests that the
city of Atlantis
had a truly immense population.
The city may have been home
to over a million people.
It was considered a
city of the gods--
a utopia-- rich in architecture,
bustling with trade,
and protected by a great army.
And then, in a single day of
violent upheaval about 12,000
years ago, Atlantis was
completely destroyed.
We can see here how
comprehensively Plato had
described the city's
shape, design, and even
its dimensions-- a very unique
model of a city set in water.
Plato was a reputable
philosopher and statesman
and would not have
risked jeopardizing
his status by inventing a myth.
Anyone during their time
could have gone to Egypt
to verify what he had said.
Plato insisted that what
he was saying was true.
In his day, honor and
truth were held higher
than the value of life.
>> "This tale about
Atlantis, though strange,
is certainly true, having
been attested by Solon,
who was the wisest
of the seven sages."
>> Where would one find
such a mighty structure?
Surely, if it was as large
as Plato had mentioned,
it should be easy
enough to find--
unless it had sunken beneath
the ocean, as legend suggests.
I needed to look
a little deeper--
or higher, for that matter.
Since man launched
into space, we've
been able to observe the earth
from higher than ever before,
seeing all formations
on our planet's surface
from a completely
new perspective.
With all the facts
before me, I came
across something astonishing.
During earlier space missions,
an exceptional structure
was spotted in a forgotten
corner of the Sahara Desert--
a place that has puzzled
scientists and geologists ever
since its discovery.
[HEARTBEAT]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It is called the Richat,
the eye of Africa.
A very unique formation
which raises many questions.
From space, the Richat
is easily visible.
Its prominent bullseye
shape stands out
in a circular form from an
otherwise-featureless Saharan
desert.
Because of its contours, it
was dubbed the eye of Africa.
It stretches about
50 kilometers across,
while the ring structure
spans over 23 kilometers.
Surprisingly, it has an
almost perfect symmetry.
Ground observations cannot
provide consensus amongst
researches about the origins
of the magnificent structure.
Some scientists thought it
was a massive impact crater,
but the lack of shock-altered
rock questions that theory.
Others propose that it was
formed by volcanic activity,
like a volcano before eruption
that ran out of energy
and collapsed into itself.
The debates of its
formation rages on.
One thing is clear.
The place has been severely
eroded and washed out--
interesting for one of the
driest places on Earth.
>> What the Richat is or how
it was formed is a riddle.
Its symmetry makes
it look almost
like a man-made structure.
But for George and
I, the fascination
lies in how closely the Richat
resembles the circular layout
of Plato's Atlantis.
>> I took the shape of Atlantis,
as Plato had described,
and placed it beside
the eye of Africa.
The match is very close.
Many people have searched
for the origins of Atlantis
under the waves of the Atlantic,
the Mediterranean, and even
the South China Seas.
But suddenly, here I was,
confronted with the possibility
that the remains
of the ocean empire
are hidden in the
Saharan Desert,
in the remote country
of Mauritania.
Mauritania is situated in
West Africa, south of Morocco,
bordered by the Atlantic Ocean,
Senegal, Mali, and Algeria.
The climate is
mostly hot and arid.
Approximately 3/4 of the country
is desert or semi-desert,
and as a result
of severe drought,
the desert has been expanding.
I had to see the Richat
structure for myself,
and I convinced Natalis to join
me on a fact-finding mission
to Mauritania--
for us, a journey
into the unknown.
To reach the Richat
was not that easy.
Our journey would take us from
Paris to Nouakchott by plane,
and then we would travel by car
from Nouakchott to the Richat.
>> Mauritania is about
the same size as Egypt.
While Egypt has a population
of about 78 million people,
Mauritania is home to
only 3 million people.
The Islamic population
speaks French and Arabic.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
One can't get very
far on English alone.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Mauritanians are proud
to preserve their Islamic
traditions and culture.
The shoreline is
bustling with fishermen
living as their ancestors
did thousands of years ago.
Mauritania's coastal waters
are amongst the richest fishing
areas in the world.
About 5 kilometers inland
from today's coastline
lies Mauritania's biggest
city, called Nouakchott.
The name means
place of the wind.
>> As one walks around the
city, it becomes evident that
the ocean played a major role
in the growth of this place.
Everywhere you look or
walk are seashells--
the pavements, the walkways,
even embedded in the tar--
almost as if the whole city
had been built upon seashells.
On our road journey from
the sea towards the Richat,
we decided to look
out for evidence
that would link
the area to Plato's
description of Atlantis.
If we were on the right
track, then 12,000 years ago,
this whole area should
have been under water.
As we traveled northeast
towards the Adrar highlands,
it seemed we could
not escape the ocean.
Miles away from the sea,
littered endlessly on the sand,
were shells--
undamaged, perfectly preserved.
There are other signs that
this desert floor was once
the ocean bed.
From boats beached miles from
the water and entire whale
skeletons emerging
from the desert sand.
Perhaps the sand of the
Sahara moved into the water,
pushing into the Atlantic,
or the land has been rising.
Maybe the ocean level
has been dropping.
Most likely a
combination of factors.
>> One can imagine that the
sea was here not too long ago.
>> From the desert plane, we
traveled to the small city
of Atar, which lies at the
feet of the Adrar highlands.
The grand, sweeping
mountain range
rises from the flat desert,
just as Plato described
the main island of Atlantis.
>> "The whole island of
Atlantis was said to be towering
and steep towards
the side of the sea."
>> The seashells,
erosion patterns,
and geological formations
indicate that the sea may have
once washed up against the
cliffs of the Adrar highlands.
In the area of Atar,
at the foothills
of the Adrar highlands, all
the wells produce saltwater.
That seems extremely odd, since
we are 400 kilometers away
from the ocean.
You would have to dig
up to 200 meters deep
to find fresh water.
From Atar, we made our
way up the mountains
which, Plato
describes as follows.
>> "The mountains of the island
of Atlantis were celebrated
for their number and
size and beauty."
>> We agree with Plato.
The mountain scenery
is fantastic.
Watch what awaits us once we
had climbed the mountains.
>> We knew from Plato's writings
that this scenery had to change
dramatically if we were
on the right track.
According to him,
we were supposed
to reach a huge, level plane.
After making our way up the
mountains onto the ridge,
to our amazement, we encountered
a vast and nearly endless
plane.
>> "The plane was
smooth and even."
>> George and I drove over
four hours on this never-ending
plane, heading for
our final destination,
which might have been the
capital city of Atlantis.
>> Plato, again,
gives us guidance.
According to his measurements,
the capital city was enormous.
Plato said it had
a wall around it
with the diameter of
approximately 23 kilometers.
When you see the
Richat in the distance,
you begin to appreciate
its immense size.
According to measurements
from satellite imagery,
the outer ring of the
Richat has a diameter
of about 23 kilometers,
just as Plato said.
This is about half the
size of New York City.
>> "There were alternate
zones of sea and land,
larger and smaller,
encircling one another.
There were two of land
and three of water,
which were turned as
with a lathe, each
having its circumference
equidistant every way
from the center."
>> The eye of Africa
is just that--
rings of hills and
rings of valleys.
And even today, the
valleys tend to hold water
during the short rainy season.
>> One is simply dwarfed by the
immense size of the terraces.
On land, they look like hills
that roll into the horizon.
But from the air, they
form concentric circles.
Here we can see that the
lower-lying areas had
been underwater at some point.
[THUNDER]
>> Plato describes violent
flooding, earthquakes,
and tsunamis that destroyed the
entire island in a single day
of disaster.
Most people assume that the
city sank away and is now
deep under the waves
of the Atlantic.
However, closer inspection
to Plato's account
tells a different tale.
>> "Atlantis, when
sunk by the earthquake,
became an impossible barrier
of mud to voyagers sailing from
hence to any part of the ocean."
>> As we all know, earthquakes
can cause tsunamis.
And tsunamis regress, leaving
behind nothing but mud.
Here we learn from
Plato that Atlantis
had turned into a mud
barrier, impassable by ships.
To-date, it has been difficult
to make sense of the statement.
But if we consider
that the empire was
hit by an earthquake, washed
over by an enormous tsunami,
and buried in mud--
which became the dry
sand of the Richat--
then this statement
makes a lot of sense.
The Atlantic regressed,
and the entire city
may not have sunk
away under the waves,
but was destroyed and covered
by the mud of the flood.
Perhaps it was the
Great Flood known
to all cultures in some way.
>> Could it have been the
site of the fabled city?
>> What could this place
have been during the days
of Atlantis?
And if it was Atlantis,
how did the sea regress,
or the land rise?
The two main possibilities
are tectonic movements
and volcanic activity.
The entire western
seaboard of Africa
sits on a shifting
tectonic plate.
And it's very possible that this
shifting is raising the land,
as the evidence of the shells
in inland Mauritania indicates.
If we were to go
back 12,000 years
and the land was
300 meters lower,
the entire area around
the eye of Africa
would be an island
in the Atlantic--
the main island of Atlantis.
The water would fill
the rings of the Richat,
leaving the grand terraces
of land and design
of Plato's Atlantis.
There is evidence of volcanic
activity in West Africa.
Only about 500 kilometers
off the coast of Mauritania
lay the volcanic islands of Cape
Verde and the Canary Islands,
which give clear evidence of
volcanic activity in the area.
This could have aided
to the rise of land
within the last 12,000 years.
>> We needed to go back
to the finer details
in Plato's narrative to see
if any evidence on the ground
could link the
Richat to the legend.
>> "The God Poseidon found no
difficulty in making special
arrangements for
the center island,
bringing up two springs of
water from beneath the earth--
one of warm water, and
the other of cold."
>> We found it interesting
that the locals have dug a well
in the center island
that provides water.
And an oasis was
formed around it,
even though it is in the
Sahara, one of the driest
places on Earth.
>> And incredibly, unlike the
wells in the area that produce
salt water, this one
produces fresh water.
>> "The country immediately
surrounding the city
of Atlantis was a level plane,
itself surrounded by mountains
which descended towards the sea.
This part of the island
looked towards the south
and was sheltered
from the north."
>> The Richat is
surrounded by a plane,
sheltered by mountains
towards the north,
and open towards the south,
just as Plato described.
Natalis and I were
convinced that we
were walking on the same
landscape as detailed by Plato.
>> "The surrounding mountains
of the city flowed with rivers."
>> The desert we see before
us today once looked very
different.
Science has confirmed
that the Sahara was once
lush and fruitful-- an area rich
with vegetation, and flowing
with rivers and streams.
[RUSHING WATER]
We can still see the
scars of the riverbeds
on satellite imagery,
which flow down
the mountainside
towards the Richat.
But most of them have
dried up completely.
>> "There were a great number
of elephants on the island."
>> In and around
the eye of Africa,
we discovered a variety
of animal remains.
In particular, we were shown
elephant teeth near the Richat.
These finds are proof of a
time when the land was grazed
by large animals, like
giraffes and elephants,
as the rock paintings
near the Richat confirm.
>> Could this have
been Atlantis?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What happened to
this magnificent city?
What happened to the people?
Could there be any remnants
of this civilization?
There is an abundance of ancient
artifacts around the Richat
area, which makes a compelling
argument for cultures that have
come and gone in the region.
Near the Richat, we were taken
to a rough, makeshift museum
which has a collection of
numerous well-preserved
artifacts, saved and
meticulously sorted
by the locals.
Their written and
oral history only
goes back about 1,000
years, although it is clear
that these relics are far older
than their formal history.
Some of those remnants
are ancient stone spheres,
which could have served
an artillery function.
They have a flattened
side, so they can be
stored without rolling about.
You can assume that they were
not used by some lone hunter,
but kept in shelves
in large numbers
and used in organized warfare.
It would have been the most
effective method of defense.
This type of artillery
may have also
been used in naval warfare.
A lot of those stone
spheres have been
found in and around the Richat.
This gives us
further evidence for
an ancient,
sophisticated society
in the area with a proper
military setup in place.
>> One of the artifacts we
were shown is a needle made
of stone.
The needle is made completely
symmetrical and is very smooth.
It demonstrates a high
standard of workmanship
and civilization.
>> A lot of those arrowheads
are found near the Richat.
They're usually claimed to
be around 10,000 years old.
The arrowheads are
made from stone
and are worked with
great precision.
Plato clearly describes
Atlantis as a culture that
was handling metals, and
copper artifacts are also
found around the Richat.
Traditionally,
archaeologists tend
to date them to later periods--
sometimes only a few
hundred years old.
But as a fact, copper was
known to some of the oldest
civilizations on record,
and has an official history
of at least 10,000 years.
It is estimated that about
200,000 visitors have passed
through the area over
the past 40 years,
with most of them taking
archaeological artifacts
as souvenirs.
However, the region is
still abundant with objects
of past civilizations.
Hopefully, in
time, this could be
acknowledged as one
of the world's richest
archaeological sites.
In exploring the
eye of Africa, we
were shown ancient fishing
equipment, as well as
stone rings that we used
thousands of years ago.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> They resembled the same
shape and design we'd seen
the fishermen at the coast
use to bind and weight down
their nets.
It was explained to us how these
and other artifacts were once
used for fishing.
This was further
evidence to us that what
is now 400 kilometers
inland may have once been
a place by the sea.
So there was no shortage
of artifacts in the area,
but what puzzled
Natalis and I was
the absence of any remains
of buildings, which would
have made up this huge city.
Of what materials had the
buildings been constructed?
To find answers, we searched
again in Plato's words.
>> "Stone was used
in their work."
>> This means the buildings
were made from natural stone,
quarried locally.
That is very similar to how
the locals still construct
their homes today, and
the ancient techniques
that their ancestors used
thousands of years ago.
>> The locals take loose and
uncut rocks and use a crude
mixture of mud and dung
as mortar to build.
No bricks are used, just
stone from the area.
>> "The stone which they used
was quarried from the center
island."
>> Examining a satellite
image of the Richat today,
one sees what appears to be a
quarry, or mine, in the center,
although the locals are not
aware of any mining activity
around the Richat.
>> "The stone which
they quarried was white,
another black,
and a third, red."
>> In the valleys of the
Richat, the predominant colors
of the rocks are a deep
red, black, and white.
We came across a building which
the locals had constructed
about 30 years
ago, which had been
built using the same ancient
techniques as their ancestors.
Interestingly, this building
shows the very same colors
as Plato had described.
>> What had happened to
all these structures?
>> Due to the way the
buildings are constructed,
only a short while after they
collapse or are abandoned,
they could disintegrate into
a pile of loose rocks with no
shape or form.
One is unable to see
any sign of a building
just a few decades
after its destruction.
This is just how the
Richat appears today--
endless heaps of loose rocks.
Moreover, if the city was
destroyed as violently
and quickly as
Plato described, one
doubts there would
be much of anything
left of the walls and
buildings 12,000 years later.
>> To George and I, it
was amazing how closely
Plato's description matched
the actual features at the eye
of Africa.
[JET ENGINE ROARING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Each culture has some
form of mythology.
Myth stems from legend,
and legend from history.
Often, threads of truth are
spun into the storytelling
that make up myths and legends.
>> For example, for
centuries, Homer's "Iliad,"
which tells the epic adventures
in the war against Troy,
was considered Greek poetry,
with no real historical value.
It was seen as nothing
but a fantastic
tale filled with
giants, monsters,
and impossibly beautiful women.
Even the great city of
Troy seemed to exist only
in Homer's imagination.
However, in the 1870s,
a wealthy businessman
named Heinrich Schliemann
excavated a site he believed
to be the city of Troy.
Schliemann unearthed several
levels of cities, built one
after the other.
One of them has now been
identified as Homer's Troy--
an excellent example
of how history became
legend, and legend became myth.
Will the Richat one day be
linked to the great legend?
Another example is the ancient
Cambodian city of Angkor.
The lost city of Angkor
was a legend for centuries.
Cambodian villagers living at
the edge of the thick jungle
told tales of huge temples
and buildings hidden
in a dense tropical forest.
Their stories were casually
dismissed by the authorities
as legends and fairy tales.
However, some explorers
believed in the tales
of a powerful and
rich Cambodian empire.
And towards the end
of the 19th century,
the great temples of
Angkor in the deep jungle
were discovered.
The legend became
fact, and the lost city
was opened up to the world.
A stream of explorers,
historians, and archaeologists
are still coming to Angkor to
study the vast, ancient city.
>> This is another example
of how history became legend,
and legend became myth.
>> Perhaps the most compelling
evidence that this could have
been where Atlantis existed
is the size and shape
of the Richat.
Plato's dimensions of
Atlantis were quite detailed.
Particularly, the diameter of
the outer wall-- as per Plato--
and the size of the Richat
correspond very closely,
with a diameter
of 23 kilometers.
Let us look at some
facts Plato gave us.
>> "The main city of Atlantis
consists of concentric circles
of water and land."
>> Fact-- that is what
the Richat consists of.
>> "The main city was
constructed with red, black,
and white rocks."
>> Fact-- these are the
type of stones which exist
in the Richat.
>> "The surrounding lands
of Atlantis were grazed
by elephants."
>> Fact-- we found
remains of elephant.
>> "A well near the central
acropolis provided the city
with fresh water."
>> Fact-- yes, a
well was discovered.
>> "Atlantis is based in
a part of the Atlantic,
which is now no longer
accessible by ship."
>> Fact-- the Richat
meets this criteria.
>> "The capital city of
Atlantis was densely crowded."
>> Fact-- the number of ancient
artifacts found is staggering,
indicating a once
dense population.
>> "The area surrounding the
capital city is sheltered
by mountains from the north
and open towards the south."
>> Fact-- this is the
exact layout of the Richat.
>> "The Main island of Atlantis
is marked by a huge plane."
>> Fact-- we traveled for hours
through this extensive plane.
>> "The plane was
surrounded by mountains,
leading towards the sea."
>> Fact-- we have seen the
mountains leading towards
the old ocean bed.
>> "There was an abundance of
metals, like copper and gold."
>> Fact-- the main export items
of Mauritania today are metals
like copper, iron,
and even gold.
The eye of Africa
is the structure
that most closely matches
Plato's accounts of Atlantis.
Every other site that
has been proposed
falls desperately short of the
dimensions, design, and scale
of the fabled city.
But what about other evidence?
>> Is there any way we can
link the cultures of people
presently living in West Africa
to the culture of Atlantis?
What do we know about the
culture of the Atlanteans?
>> Well, thanks to
Plato, quite a bit.
We know from him that their
main god was Poseidon,
the God of the sea
the God of the waters,
usually portrayed as
half-human and half-fish.
>> [NON-ENGLISH CHANTING]
>> What deities does the local
population of today's West
Africa worship?
Over the past 1,000
years, the majority
of the local population
has converted to Islam.
In contrast, the Dogon
people in particular
still maintain some of their
ancient tribal beliefs.
>> Let us take a closer look.
The Dogon believe in
spirits called nommo,
usually described as amphibious
beings, fish-like creatures.
Folk art depictions
of the nommos
show creatures with humanoid
torsos and fish-like tails.
The nommos are also referred
to as the masters of the water.
This seems very
close to the images
we have of the God Poseidon,
the god of the sea--
which, according to Plato, was
the main god of the Atlanteans.
>> What else does Plato tell
us about the religious beliefs
of the Atlanteans?
>> "The God Poseidon fell
in love with a mortal woman
and begat and brought up five
pairs of male twin children."
>> Five pairs of twins.
That's 10 children.
This is why Atlantis was
set up into 10 kingdoms.
>> Even the names of some of
the twins are still very alive
in the region.
Atlas was the name of the first
born of the first set of twins.
His name is still
present in the words,
"Atlantic Ocean," the "Atlas
mountains," and "Atlantis."
The kingdom bordering
southern Spain
was named after his
twin brother, Gadeiros.
The old name for Southern
Spain, Gades, as well as
the city of Cadiz, are
a reminder of this twin.
And the Dogon tell us that
nommo, the master of the water,
underwent a transformation
and multiplied
into four pairs of twins.
>> Both cultures seem quite
preoccupied with twins.
>> The twin cult is still
very strong in West Africa.
As a matter of fact, one
particular population group
in West Africa has
the highest birth rate
of twins in the world.
The twin cult finds its
expressions in works of art.
Sought-after sculptures
from West Africa show twins.
But even in Western
culture, the star sign
Gemini depicting
twins is very popular.
And also, fish-like beings are
accounted for with the star
sign of Pisces,
which again, is shown
in the form of a twin fish.
Clearly, the Dogon's
belief in amphibious beings
ties up with the Atlantean God
Poseidon, who is also portrayed
as an amphibious being--
as does the preoccupation
with twins in both cultures.
The Dogon people have
traditional astronomical
knowledge about the star Sirius.
That would normally be
considered impossible
without the use of telescopes.
Could that knowledge have
come from an ancient,
highly-developed society?
>> It is believed that for
eons, the Dogon have known that
Sirius is a binary star system
where two suns are orbiting
around each other--
Sirius A and Sirius B.
Obviously, with the naked eye,
this is impossible to notice.
The Dogon further knew that it
takes 50 years for one orbit
to complete.
You would need fine astronomical
equipment to pick this up,
which the Dogon
certainly did not have.
Furthermore, the Dogon knew
that the one star, Sirius B,
is actually a white dwarf star.
This is a dying, collapsing sun.
Our sun will, by the way,
share the same destiny.
Via a red giant, the sun is
reduced to less than 0.01%
of its original size while
keeping the same mass,
thus becoming incredibly heavy.
For example, a teaspoon
of soil from Sirius B
will weigh as much as 6 tons.
It has 3,000 times the
density of a diamond.
This, the Dogon also knew.
They described the dwarf star
as the smallest thing, but also
the heaviest.
The Dogon description of this
actually brings the matter
to the point much better than
our lengthy explanations.
There is more.
The Dogon knew that there were
other objects in the Sirius
star system, much smaller
than Sirius A and B. There
is, until now, no
conclusive scientific proof
of its existence.
Our technical equipment
is, as of yet,
not advanced enough to
confirm or deny this.
Critics mention a cultural
contamination theory,
putting forward the possibility
that the Dogon received
this information via
occasional contacts
from Europe in the
last century, or even
through the
researchers themselves
by incorrect questioning.
Until today, the
debate carries on.
However, there are
other African cultures
who have the same ancient
knowledge about the star Sirius
that was held long before
the arrival of the white man
and his telescopes in Africa.
>> Would it not appear plausible
that this ancient knowledge
that the Dogon and other West
African cultures have may stem
from a previously
highly-developed civilization?
>> The evil eye, or evil look,
is believed by many cultures
to be able to cause bad
luck, disease, or even death.
It is comparable to
an ill-wishing look,
the look of an
envious person who
is not happy to see
you prosper, but will
be pleased to see you fail.
>> To counter this evil look,
a protective good luck charm
in the shape of an eye is used.
>> Classical Greece probably had
knowledge of the evil eye from
the Phoenicians
in ancient Egypt.
And ancient Egypt, again,
had far-older sources, which
could have come from Atlantis.
It is interesting to note that
the good luck charm looks very
similar to the shape
of the city of Atlantis
when seen from space.
The belief in the evil eye is
the strongest in West Africa
and in the Mediterranean
region, exactly the area which
we had mapped out earlier.
But the belief has
spread to other regions
as well, like America, Europe,
the Middle East, India,
and Tibet.
If an eye with blue rings--
very closely resembling
the water rings
of the fabled city--
is used as a good luck
talisman to ward off evil,
then could Atlantis have
had the same symbolism
for our whole planet, keeping
evil away from our world?
Let us recall--
Atlantis would have been
clearly recognizable from space
as a structure closely
resembling an eye.
Because of space
travel, the Richat
is today known as
the eye of Africa.
Plato described a violent
and overwhelming cataclysm
which resulted in the
disappearance of Atlantis.
Some speculate that
it was the Great
Flood or the Epic of Gilgamesh.
Whatever it was,
it must have been
spectacularly
devastating to have
annihilated a kingdom entirely.
All structures were
destroyed and buried.
Let us consider the
following scenario.
What would happen to
today's civilization
if it were hit by
a major disaster
and reduced to only
a few survivors?
What effect would this
have on the surviving
people and human history?
In an instant, all
electrical equipment
would be rendered useless.
There would be no
more electricity
supply, which would mean no more
lights, no TV, no computers.
All infrastructure
would be gone.
No more fresh food supplies
from supermarkets, restaurants,
or shops.
Telephones-- mobile
or otherwise--
would not function anymore.
Access to fresh
water would be lost.
Within a few hours,
the survivors
would be forced to fight
for their bare life,
trying to find food and shelter.
Within only a few
generations, most buildings
would have crumbled
and turned into ruins.
Even concrete structures
would have disintegrated.
After a few hundred years,
all knowledge our civilization
had will be lost.
Science, mathematics, chemistry,
physics, biology, geography--
all those subjects
would no longer
be relevant or required
by the survivors,
and be lost within
a few generations.
Books would have fallen apart,
deteriorated and crumbled,
with no one able to read them
or copy them for preservation.
Information stored on computers
would be utterly obsolete.
Stories of an
advanced human society
who was able to
travel into space
would slowly grow fainter.
After a few thousand
years, nothing
would be left of our
today's buildings,
having been turned into forests.
Motorcars would have
long rusted away.
As time passes, the memories
of our technologically advanced
civilization would
fade more rapidly,
and only be preserved in some
stories and legends, which
would increasingly be considered
as the imagination of people
who are unhappy with
their present way of life
and who would wish for
some fairytale to be true.
Stories of our civilization
would have turned into legends.
Anyone believing in
it would be ridiculed.
After a few hundred years-- or
maybe a few thousand years--
new historical events would
form the official history
of those surviving
humans, and this
would be declared the
real history, the proven
history of this age.
Maybe some giant power
station would still
remain in a desolate
condition, hardly
recognizable from its
original shape or purpose.
And our descendants might use
it as a ceremonial or funeral
place, or consider
it as a remainder
of a great temple, where
gods which are long gone
were worshipped.
Perhaps some massive
foundations would
survive as a
remarkable structure
whose origin would be puzzling.
Our history-- the history
of our civilization--
would have become
legend, a myth.
After several thousand
years, the human population
would start to grow again, come
up with glimpses of progress,
start small cities with
basic written languages,
laws and trade.
This would be the beginning
of a new era, a new age.
Could there have been
civilizations before us?
Could Atlantis have
been a reality?
We have established
how unkindly time deals
with our human accomplishments,
like structures and buildings.
We can be sure that
after 12,000 years,
hardly any remnants of our
civilization would be found.
But we do have the tales,
the legends, the myth.
In Greek mythology,
there is a tale
about the five ages of man.
It was written down
from oral history
by the Greek poet Hesiod
about 3,000 years ago.
The first one is a golden age,
where man lived among the gods
and freely mingled with them.
Man lived to a very old age,
but with youthful appearance,
and did not have to work.
After their time on
Earth came to an end,
they became the
guardians of mortal men.
In the second age,
the silver age,
men started to refuse
to worship the gods.
And they were destroyed by Zeus,
God of thunder and lightning.
[THUNDER CRASHES]
They became the demons
of the underworld.
[THUNDER CRASH]
The third age was a bronze age.
It was a cruel and hard age.
Man was only interested in
wars and to fight each other.
They would not touch fruits,
but only eat animal meat.
They were stubborn,
and were wiped out
by their own violent ways.
The fourth age, again,
was noble and righteous.
It was the age of the heroes, or
demigods, that fought at Troy.
But at last, they were also
destroyed by their own wars.
However, when they
died, they would
be allowed to go to the
Elysium, or paradise--
also called the
Isles of the Blessed,
today known as the
Canary Islands.
According to Hesiod, the last
age would be our present age.
He called it the iron age.
And again, this is a
rather unpleasant age.
He speaks of children
dishonoring their parents,
and a time where brother
fights against brother.
Not the honorable and just
person will be accepted,
but the liar and the
criminal will be supported.
Law and decency disappears.
So here we do have an ancient
account of ages and eons
that have existed before us.
Of course, there are others.
The Mayans, for example,
have similar beliefs.
In combination with
our analysis of what
would happen if a disaster
would strike our globe with only
a few survivors left,
we could imagine
that some structures
on our globe
may well be the remnants
of a previous age.
Could the Richat be one of them?
Like the numerous artifacts
uncovered in the Richat area,
it could be that the
secrets of Atlantis
merely lie beneath the
sands of the Sahara,
waiting to be discovered.
If the Richat is, indeed,
the site of Atlantis,
what does it mean
to our understanding
of ancient civilization?
We are used to being taught
a linear view of history--
that man emerged from
his primal state,
slowly gained intelligence
and tribal behavior,
stumbled through the stone age,
and survived with simple tools
for hunting and building, and
that the first cities were
formed about 5,000 years ago.
Is conventional history
really our true past?
>> "Man is a being in
search of meaning."
>> The pursuit for the purpose
of life is a search for truth.
Along the way, great
discoveries are made,
and the search itself
gives meaning to life.
Perhaps civilizations before
us reached heights of intellect
and organization that
we cannot even imagine.
Perhaps they were not
the fools and simpletons
that we think they were.
All we have to do is to
look a little deeper.
[MUSIC PLAYING]